📊 India's Global Standing --- Data-Driven Insights

🧠 Project Summary This project presents an in-depth data analysis of
India's position in global development and governance indices, using
publicly available datasets. It focuses on key parameters like Human
Development Index, GDP, public sector indicators, education, health, and
more. The goal is to derive actionable insights through data cleaning,
visualization, and storytelling.

📌 Project Highlights No missing data hassles --- datasets were already
clean Combined multiple types of data (CSV + Excel) Focused on
storytelling through graphs Built to be beginner-friendly and scalable

📁 Datasets Used Human_development_index (HDI).csv Source: UNDP
Description: India's HDI scores across years.

publicsector_indicators.csv Source: World Bank Description: Public
sector performance indicators such as government effectiveness, rule of
law, and voice & accountability.

🚀 What You Can Do With This Project Explore how India's HDI has changed
over the years Understand which areas need improvement (e.g. public
trust, economic stability) Compare performance across different
governance and development metrics Use visual insights to support
research, reports, or academic work

🚀 Features 📈 Year-wise HDI visualization 💡 Comparison of public
sector indicators (e.g., government effectiveness) 🌍 Trend analysis on
GDP and development 📊 Correlation plots between multiple indicators ✅
Clean interface for data exploration 🧠 Insightful storytelling with
visualizations

📌 Key Indicators Analyzed; 🟢 Human Development Index (HDI) 💰 GDP per
capita 🗳️ Government effectiveness 🗞️ Press freedom & voice and
accountability 🏥 Health and education indices 🌏 Political and economic
freedom 🧠 Technological evolution & innovation

🧱 Tools & Technologies; Python pandas, numpy --- Data wrangling
matplotlib, seaborn --- Visualization scikit-learn --- Basic
preprocessing & analysis

🔍 Insights India's HDI has consistently improved over the years. Public
sector metrics show moderate performance, with room for growth in
accountability and political stability. A gap remains between GDP growth
and quality-of-life indicators, suggesting inequality.

✅ Learning Outcomes End-to-end project workflow: loading, cleaning,
merging datasets Cross-format data handling (.csv, .xlsx) Real-world
storytelling with data Building a compelling narrative through visual
exploration Built an end-to-end data pipeline from cleaning to insight
generation

🧩 Future Enhancements Add country comparisons (e.g., India vs China)
Use real-time APIs for up-to-date economic stats Deploy app on Streamlit
Cloud or HuggingFace Spaces Integrate dashboard filters for custom
exploration

🙌 Acknowledgements UNDP Human Development Reports World Bank Open Data
Freedom House Python open-source community
